tutorial: proposal for kdd 2024 (#28)
ibis-project/talks: kdd-2024/ibis-tutorial-KDD2024.md

The most recent Ibis tutorial is the accepted Ibis tutorial at PyCon US 2024: 
[Tutorials: Introduction to Ibis: blazing fast analytics with DuckDB, Polars, Snowflake, and more, from the comfort of your Python repl.](https://us.pycon.org/2024/schedule/presentation/55/)

### Chloe He

**Bio**
Chloe has a background in data science and started working on streaming systems when she was a Founding Engineer at Claypot AI, a startup tackling challenges in real-time machine learning. She led the infrastructure development of an open-source real-time feature engineering platform and worked on the translating and optimizing streaming workloads that served low-latency use cases. Later, she brought her streaming expertise to Voltron Data, where she now leads the development of Ibis streaming.

**Expertise:**
Chloe has presented talks and workshops across a number of conferences, such as DataConnect, NVIDIA GTC, and Google DevFest. She also taught lectures for the Machine Learning System Design course at Stanford and a crash course on recommendation systems.

2. List of contributors, i.e., tutors who will only help prepare the tutorial material

> - Cody Peterson

Author: @lostmygithubaccount and @deepyaman  

I'm thinking of you two to help contributing with whatever we will do for ML, happy to remove you if you won't be able to help or think the other one got it.

## In-memory tables, joins, and data analysis

Building on the previous notebook, we'll explore how to join in-memory data (from 
a pandas DataFrame, polars DataFrame, Python dictionary, or PyArrow Table) with
existing tables in  a local database and continue analysis on the join result.

We'll explore chained joins, and demonstrate `read_parquet` and other `read_*` methods
for loading local data into existing databases. Then we'll continue with a series 
of hands-on exercises, building up an analysis pipeline for some IMDB ratings data,
but only operating on a 5% sample of the original dataset. After, we show how the 
same expression can be computed on the full dataset without any code changes, both 
for local execution, or with bursting to a cloud database (or other hosted database).

## Streaming 

We'll build on our previous batch analysis example and turn what we've learned
towards a similar problem, but now with a real-time and constantly updating data
source. 

With hands-on exercises, we'll explore how to set up rudimentary anomaly
detection, and demonstrate how to window and group streaming data-sources before
redirecting them to downstream sinks.

> ## IbisML

Author: @lostmygithubaccount or @chloeh13q can you help writing one sentence of what we will aim to do here?

Reviewer: "We will demonstrate how to define machine learning features, create data transformation pipelines, and exeucte them across backends using IbisML. We will then use these features to train an ML model!"

Reviewer 2: I think the above is good, but we might want to mention something about how you can also do this without the usual memory constraints

Author: I added what Chloe mention in the docs, would you mind taking a crack at modifying the sentence to "mention something about how you can also do this without the usual memory constraints" 

I'm not fully sure, what we want to say here, by usual memory constraints . Is it like "running out of memory during and xgboost training" kind of thing?

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I think this is less important to cover in the outline, so I would leave it as is.

# Descriptive Title 

We need a title here, in the past we had this options

> - Scipy and PyCon 2024: Intro to Ibis: blazing fast analytics with DuckDB, Polars, Snowflake, and more,

Reviewer 3: How about: "Ibis: portable and blazing fast analytics with DuckDB, Polars, Snowflake, and more..."

Author: I'm worried that we won't capture the DS and ML crowd by using the word "analytics" but idk.

from the comfort of your Python repl.
- PyData NYC 2023: Ibis - Expressive analytics in Python at any scale

I think we needs something more DS/ML/AI kind of thing. Here are some options I 
brainstormed with gpt and modified, but Im not convinced by anyone: 

- "Ibis: The Data Scientist's Powerhouse for Blazing-Fast Analytics and Machine Learning"
- "Mastering Data Analytics and ML with Ibis: Speed, Simplicity, and Scale"
- "Elevate Your Data Science Game with Ibis: Fast, Flexible, and Future-Proof"
- "Ibis: Your Gateway to Expressive Analytics and Streamlined ML"

# Abstract (300 words)

I tried to adapt what we had for SciPy and PyCon, and include something on Streaming 
and ML. Keep in mind that streaming and ML will be a small part of this tutorial, per 
Ian's suggestion 20%, please make suggestions with this in mind. 

**(I believe we are at 270 words now)**

Tabular data analysis, a staple in data science, often encounters scalability 
challenges with pandas. In response, modern analytical databases (like DuckDB) 

> offer significant performance boosts but typically demand SQL expertise. Many of 

Author: @lostmygithubaccount I'mm not sure I follow the suggestion, would it be this edit? or something different? 
 
```suggestion
offer significant performance boosts but typically demand SQL preference abd expertise. Many of 
```

> offer significant performance boosts but typically demand SQL expertise. Many of 

Reviewer 3: yes that is what I meant

these systems only provide a SQL interface though; something far different from 
pandas’ dataframe interface, requiring a rewrite of your analysis code.

This is where Ibis comes in. Ibis is a pure-Python open-source library, originally 
created by Wes McKinney creator of pandas, that provides a dataframe interface to
many popular databases and analytics tools (DuckDB, Polars, Snowflake, Spark, etc). This 
lets users analyze data using the same consistent API, regardless of which backend 
they’re using, and without ever having to learn SQL. This tutorial introduces 
Ibis, emphasizing its role in simplifying data manipulation across diverse platforms.

> Additionally, attendees will explore Ibis' advancements in data streaming technology. The 

Reviewer: I would rephrase "Ibis' advancements in data streaming technology" to perhaps "Ibis' advancements in stream-batch unification"

> Ibis-flink backend, inspired by Apache Flink SQL, combines stream and batch into a single 

Reviewer: Can take out "inspired by Apache Flink SQL" if we're running out of space

Reviewer: I think both - Flink SQL is Flink’s effort in stream-batch unification, and it’s been rather successful, which inspired us to push the boundaries further

Author: to avoid confusion I'll remove the "inspired by Apache Flink SQL,"

framework, addressing common barriers faced by data scientists venturing into 
streaming analytics. By leveraging Ibis unified Python dataframe API, we facilitate 

> seamless transitions between batch and streaming workflows, reducing operational

Reviewer: I like this! :)

complexities and enabling real-time machine learning applications.

Last but not least, this tutorial will also introduce Ibis ML, an evolving library 

> for building machine learning pipelines using Ibis. Where these pipelines can then

Reviewer 3: Ibis ML -> IbisML

Perhaps in place of the second sentence, something like:

"IbisML brings the portability of Ibis to ML pipelines -- preprocess your data on any of the 20+ backends Ibis supports, then efficiently handoff to popular training libraries like scikit-learn, XGBoost, or PyTorch."

be used to transform and feed data to other machine learning libraries like 
xgboost or scikit-learn.

Attendees will learn that using Ibis for preprocessing, data transformation, and 
feature engineering allows seamless compilation of pipelines to SQL, enabling 
execution on diverse performant backends without the need for code rewriting 
during production deployment.

# Target audience and prerequisites for the tutorial (e.g. audience expertise)

The target audience for this hands-on tutorial is data scientists, data and machine
learning engineers, researchers, practitioners, and industry professionals who are 
already familiar with data analysis and data manipulation tools in Python. 

They may have encountered scalability challenges with some libraries like pandas 
and are interested in exploring alternative solutions to improve performance and
efficiency.

Additionally, individuals interested in data streaming technology and machine 

> learning applications would find value in learning about Ibis' advancements in 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
learning applications will find value in learning about Ibis' advancements in 
```

these areas. 

> This is a hands-on tutorial, with numerous examples to get your hands on 
> experience. Participants should ideally have some experience using Python and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is a hands-on tutorial, with numerous examples. Participants should ideally have some experience using Python and
```

**Expertise:** 
Gil Forsyth is an experienced instructor, having led tutorials at several PyData conferences, PyCon, and SciPy. He also ran internal training on Python and distributed data analysis at Capital One for several years. Gil is one of the core maintainers of Ibis.

The most recent Ibis tutorial is the accepted Ibis tutorial at PyCon US 2024: 
[Tutorials: Introduction to Ibis: blazing fast analytics with DuckDB, Polars, Snowflake, and more, from the comfort of your Python repl.](https://us.pycon.org/2024/schedule/presentation/55/)

2. List of contributors, i.e., tutors who will only help prepare the tutorial material

- I'm not sure who to put here, I will need designated responsible people for some 
  Ibis ML showcase and Ibis streaming (Chloe?)

# Corresponding tutor with her/his email address

- Naty Clementi (I'll add my email upon submission)

> # Tutorial outline. Please provide as much detail as possible.

Author: This is the part that needs more work and help to be cohesive and  include streaming and ML.

Here is where I need some help. I modify parts of the Scipy outline to include more about 
why Ibis, what is Ibis and for Who, I think this will let us introduce Ibis as part 
of a "composable data ecosystem" (also requested by Ian).  We need to include 
some streaming content and some ML content, again keep in mind that the ask is 
to introduce this as a 20% of total content.

## 0:00 - Intro and Setup “Going beyond pandas”

Get attendees up and running in a GitHub Codespace or on their laptops. A bit of
motivation about the kinds of problems where Ibis can help, and a general survey 
of attendees to find out what their existing pain points and experiences are.

## 0:15 - Introduction to Ibis basics

**Slides**
- What is Ibis?: Ibis as part of a composable data ecosystem.
- Why Ibis?: present the problems that Ibis tackles and the benefits of adopting it.

> - Who Is Ibis for?: shown the versatility of profiles that can benefit from Ibis (data engineers, data analysts, and data scientists, any data practitioner) and how.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Who Is Ibis for?: show how data engineers, data analysts, data scientists, and any data practitioner can benefit from Ibis
```

**Get familiarized with basics: **

A hands-on, follow-along notebook introducing the basic verbs of Ibis data 
analysis (select, filter, group_by, order_by, and aggregate), demonstrating a 
simple example on a few local query engines with hands-on exercises throughout.

## 1:00 - Coffee Break (5 minutes that definitely takes 10 minutes)

## 1:10 - In-memory tables, joins, and data analysis (need to adapt this for audience)

Building on the previous notebook, we'll explore how to join in-memory data (from 
a pandas DataFrame, Python dictionary, or PyArrow Table) with existing tables in 
a local database and continue analysis on the join result.

> We'll touch on the Ibis deferred operator for specifying predicates in chained joins, 
> and demonstrate read_parquet and other read_* methods for loading local data into
> existing databases. Then we'll continue with a series of hands-on exercises, 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We'll explore chained joins, and demonstrate read_parquet and other read_* methods for loading local data into
existing databases. Then we'll continue with a series of hands-on exercises, 
```

we no longer _need_ the underscore for chained joins, so we can introduce it elsewhere.

building up an analysis pipeline for some IMDB ratings data, but only operating 
on a 5% sample of the original dataset. After, we show how the same expression 
can be computed on the full dataset without any code changes, both for local 
execution, or with bursting to a cloud database (or other hosted database).

## 1:50 - Coffee Break (5 minutes) + Q&A in the room

HERE IS WHERE WE NEED TO THINK HOW TO TIE THE PREVIOUS CONTENT WITH STREAMING AND ML 
WHAT WE HAVE IN THE SCIPY TUTORIAL IS 

## 2:10 - Selectors 
Continuing on from joins, we'll introduce selectors as a means of quickly 

> renaming and cleaning datasets, a powerful feature stolen inspired by dplyr.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
renaming and cleaning datasets, a powerful feature ~stolen from~ inspired by dplyr.
```

> ## 2:30 - UDFs and sql passthrough (I THINK THIS SHOULD BE GONE GIVEN THE AUDIENCE AND TIME)
> 
> Demonstrate using UDFs to add custom operations.
> 
> Explain and demonstrate various "escape hatches" when you really need to use SQL directly.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

agreed on cutting this section

# 3:00 - Coffee Break (5 minutes) + Q&A in the room

> ## HELP HERE MAYBE AN EXAMPLE THAT CAN SHOW STREAMING AND ML, OR TWO? IT'LL HAVE TO BE SMALL

Reviewer: +1 on things being disconnected. 

I think [something like this](https://ibis-project.org/posts/unified-stream-batch/) is a good example; generally the demos that we do for ibis streaming show some type of window aggregation in Flink (because window aggregations play an important role, especially in a lot of the ML-powered use cases that we were looking at), then execute the same window aggregation in DuckDB/another batch engine. 

My concern would be: would we need to spend time introducing Flink/streaming? I think it may be hard for the audience to understand why we're doing this / why this is important if they have little understanding of the problem space (the message may be blurry - they're all just backends, now a streaming backend, so what?). 

Perhaps 5 minutes talking about the problem / streaming and ~10 minutes walking through an example?

Reviewer 2: @chloeh13q @deepyaman do either of you have any experience adding data generators like those used in the flink examples?

If it isn't too cumbersome, my thinking is we can have it fake incoming IMDB ratings, so we start with a batched version of the problem, using that to introduce Ibis as we build up expressions, then we can pivot to an example that involves a stream of incoming reviews (obviously contrived, but I think it would be reasonably representative)

Reviewer: Yes we have done this before. Flink has a datagen connector; alternatively in the demos we spin up a Kafka topic and use the python-kafka client to write data into it

# Descriptive Title 

> - "Ibis: The Data Scientist's Powerhouse for Blazing-Fast Analytics and Machine Learning"

Reviewer 4: nit: Powerhouse and Blazing-fast are both buzzwords, I'd suggest giving a more direct title on why Ibis is the powerhouse and why it's blazing-fast on large scale data

Author: Sure, Do you have a suggestion? We were trying to get a title that targets DS and ML.

Reviewer 4: how about something like: "Unified Machine Learning & Analytics workflows with Ibis: bridging batch and streaming from local notebook to production scale"

Reviewer 3: I would change "Powerhouse" to "Toolkit" -- I don't think the focus of this talk as-is is on bridging batch to local though. we should probably focus on our strengths today (Analytics) and the next-level things (ML, Streaming)

perhaps:

"Ibis: The Data Scientist's Toolkit for Blazing-Fast Analytics, Machine Learning, and Stream Processing"

Reviewer 2: boom.  :shipit:

> - "Ibis: The Data Scientist's Powerhouse for Blazing-Fast Analytics and Machine Learning"

Author: ```suggestion
- "Ibis: The Data Scientist's Toolkit for Blazing-Fast Analytics, Machine Learning, and Stream Processing"
```

dataframe interface to many popular databases and analytics tools (DuckDB,
Polars, Snowflake, Spark, etc). This lets users analyze data using the same
consistent API, regardless of which backend they’re using, and without ever
having to learn SQL. This tutorial introduces Ibis, emphasizing its role in
simplifying data manipulation across diverse platforms.

Additionally, attendees will explore Ibis' advancements in stream-batch unification. The 
Ibis-flink backend combines stream and batch into a single 
framework, addressing common barriers faced by data scientists venturing into 
streaming analytics. By leveraging Ibis' unified Python dataframe API, we facilitate 
seamless transitions between batch and streaming workflows, reducing operational
complexities and enabling real-time machine learning applications.

Last but not least, this tutorial will also introduce IbisML, an evolving library 
for building machine learning pipelines using Ibis. IbisML brings the portability
of Ibis to ML pipelines -- preprocess your data on any of the 20+ backends that 
Ibis supports, then efficiently handoff to popular training libraries like

> scikit-learn, XGBoost, or PyTorch

Author: ```suggestion
scikit-learn, XGBoost, or PyTorch.
```

existing tables in  a local database and continue analysis on the join result.

We'll explore chained joins, and demonstrate `read_parquet` and other `read_*` methods
for loading local data into existing databases. Then we'll continue with a series 
of hands-on exercises, building up an analysis pipeline for some IMDB ratings data,
but only operating on a 5% sample of the original dataset. After, we show how the 
same expression can be computed on the full dataset without any code changes, both 
for local execution, or with bursting to a cloud database (or other hosted database).

## Streaming 

We'll build on our previous batch analysis example and turn what we've learned
towards a similar problem, but now with a real-time and constantly updating data
source. 

With hands-on exercises, we'll explore how to set up rudimentary anomaly
detection, and demonstrate how to window and group streaming data-sources before
redirecting them to downstream sinks.

## IbisML

We will demonstrate how to define machine learning features, create data
transformation pipelines, and execute them across backends using IbisML. We will

> then use these features to train an ML model

Author: ```suggestion
then use these features to train an ML model.
```

clarification of concepts, and discussion of shared interests. Seating arrangements 
will facilitate pairing, with learners switching partners periodically to maximize
interaction and prevent anyone from feeling isolated.

- **Collaborative space to ask questions:** We will use the conference slack, or 
provide a channel for the students to ask questions in a written format while the 
tutorial is being performed. This lets us capture more questions, given that 
sometimes not everyone feels comfortable asking it out loud.

- **Peak Rule for Lesson Endings:** We will aim to end each lesson/section on a 
high note, leaving learners with a positive impression of the session. By focusing
on the most intense and final moments, we enhance the overall learning experience
and leave participants feeling motivated and satisfied.

- **One Up, One Down Feedback:** At the end of the day, learners will provide
alternating positive and negative feedback points about the day's session. This 
structured feedback encourages participants to express their honest opinions, 
helping instructors to address concerns effectively.

# A brief discussion of the potential societal impacts of your tutorial

> 

Author: I took a crack at this, let me know if I over did it. Happy to cut some things over.
